So you've done the basics: you've cut down a tree, gotten some wood, and made your crafting table. One of the first things you may notice is a warning that appears when you craft a wooden pickaxe:

{"image":"woodpick-nerf.png", scale:0.25}

In this pack, wooden and stone tools are nerfed down to 64 durability. Gold, diamond, and iron tools are completely unusable!

To avoid this, you'll need to use tools from mods instead. But for now, a wooden pickaxe is fine to use to get some cobblestone and make a stone pickaxe. If you'd like, you can also use Tinkers' Construct to make a flint pickaxe. See the guide book you spawned with, §oMaterials and You: Volume 1§r, to learn how to do this. If you don't have it, you can look up its crafting recipe in NEI (see the page on Not Enough Items in this guide for more information). Note that in this pack, flint won't randomly drop from breaking gravel. You can put 3 gravel into your crafting grid to get 1 flint. To make a flint pickaxe, you do not need to make the entire pickaxe out of flint; only the pickaxe head needs to be made out of flint. An example is shown below.

{"image":"flint-pick.png", scale:0.25}
§oUse the Stencil Table to make patterns for a Pickaxe Head, Tool Rod, and Tool Binding. Use those patterns in the Part Builder to make each part, and make sure that the pickaxe head is flint. In the Tool Station, click the button on the left to make a pickaxe and put each tool part in the corresponding slot.§r

Whether you made a stone pickaxe or flint pickaxe, they both have a mining level of Iron. This means that they can mine ores like coal, copper, tin, and iron. Go down and mine some ores!

As stated above, vanilla pickaxes made out of iron, gold, and diamond are useless since they can't mine any blocks. Thus, at this point, you will be forced to move to other tools. Make a bronze pickaxe - the best option you have is to use Tinkers' Construct to make one. You'll need to make a Smeltery first to make a pickaxe head out of a metal. See the guides you have (or craft them if you don't), §oMaterials and You: Volume 1§r, as well as §oMighty Smelting§r to learn how to do this.

To make bronze, you'll need to make an alloy out of (3) copper and (1) tin. The best and most efficient early-game way to do this is to use a Smeltery, as mentioned before. Additionally, the Smeltery will also double the output you get from ores, so you can get 2 ingots worth of material from every ore! Below are some examples of valid Smeltery arrangements.

{"image":"1x1-smeltery.png", scale:0.5}
{"image":"3x3-smeltery.png", scale:0.5}
§oProtip: If you find a village, they typically contain many of the materials you need for a Smeltery!§r

To power your Smeltery, you'll need to get some lava. Make a Bucket (or Fired Clay Bucket) to transport the lava and put it in your Smeltery's Seared Tank. Now, you can smelt ores (and other items) inside the Smeltery using the Smeltery Controller. To make bronze, smelt 3 copper and 1 tin. Once both are done, they will automatically combine to create Bronze.

To make a Bronze Pickaxe Head, you'll need to make a Pickaxe Head Cast. To do so, use your Smeltery and a Casting Table to cast 1 ingot of aluminum brass OR 2 ingots of gold onto any pickaxe head made on a Part Builder. For more information, check NEI and your guide book, §oMighty Smelting§r.

If you've already made a pickaxe from Tinkers' Construct, you can actually use your Tool Station to swap the existing head of your pickaxe with your bronze one, provided that your existing tool has full durability. To repair a Tinkers' tool, place it with its Repair Material in a crafting grid or Tool Station (check the Repair Material by holding SHIFT on the tool).

{"image":"bronze-pick.png", scale:0.25}

Your bronze pickaxe has a mining level of Redstone. The progression for mining levels, in order, are as follows:
1. Iron
2. Redstone
3. Obsidian
4. Cobalt
5. Manyullyn

One way you can upgrade your pickaxe to Obsidian level is to add a Diamond modifier on it using your Tool Station. You will need a free modifier slot on your pickaxe. If you have free modifiers, you'll see "Modifiers remaining:", then a number, when you hold SHIFT on your tool. To get more modifiers, level up your tool by using it to mine. Eventually, you'll see a message like below:

{"image":"tinker-level.png", scale:0.25}

When you level up your tool, you can get another modifier slot and a random modifier for your tool. To check how close you are to leveling up, hold SHIFT on your tool and check its Skill XP. In this case, I got lucky and randomly got a free Diamond modifier. However, if you need to apply it yourself, place the tool in your Tool Station, then place a Diamond in one of the other slots.

Once you've gotten a Obsidian level pickaxe, your goal is to get an Alumite pickaxe to get a Cobalt level pickaxe. Check NEI to learn how to make Alumite, which is another alloy.

Then, venture into your Nether. Your goal is to find Cobalt and Ardite ore. Manyullyn is an alloy made of those two metals. It is recommended that you make a Cobalt Pickaxe next. Despite still having a mining level of Cobalt, Cobalt is the highest mining level you will practically need. A Cobalt Pickaxe also has a higher mining speed than a Manyullyn Pickaxe.

At this point, gather more resources and start exploring the mods avaliable to you! For help with specific mods, ask around or look online.